======================================================
A Rescope of the MODAL Project for Financial Year 2017
======================================================

Background
==========

Models to Observations, a Digital Atmospheric Library (MODAL) is an Argonne
Strategic Initiative aimed at building better observations of the earth through
the use of designing integrated field laboratories using LES models and
instrument simulators. 

The project has two distinct parts: A set well documented library of atmospheric scenes and a software repository containing instrument simulators that produce ARM-like instrument data streams from the atmospheric scenes.

Progress in Financial Year 2016
===============================

We made substantial progress since the project was funded despite difficulties
in hiring a postdoctoral staff member. We ran our first set of LES simulations
using forcing data from the RICO campaign [1]. We designed a simple simulator
for a scanning cloud radar and set this up to do simple conical scans of the
atmospheric scene generated by the LES data. 

.. figure:: ./cloud_radar_simulator.png
   :scale: 110 %
   :alt: Simulated clouds

   Figure 1: As example of LES Simulated clouds and radar sampled then
   re-gridded clouds. 


Figure 1 shows modelled cloud liquid water content from WRF-LES on the left and
a retrieved cloud field from a conically scanning cloud radar on the right. 

Figure 2 shows the increasing error in retrieved cloud fraction as a function of
height and also as a function of the number of nested cones. 

.. figure:: ./cloud_frac.png
   :scale: 110 %
   :alt: Simulated clouds

   Figure 2: Error in cloud fraction as a function of height in the model domain
   and number of elevation angles in a conical scanning pattern. 

This initial work has allowed us to investigate the errors in retrieved cloud
fraction due to under-sampling and is an early demonstration of the potential of
MODAL. 

Plan for Financial Year 2017
============================

First, in 2017 we will be expanding the number of instruments simulated. We will
be slightly reducing the number of planned instruments to ensure success
specifically aiming at the suite of instruments that support the ARM flagship
product: Actively Remotely Sensed Cloud Layers, ARSCL [2]. These are: The
vertically pointing Cloud Radar, Microwave Radiometer and micropulse LIDAR. The
last two are mentored by Argonne scientists. 

We will engineer these simulators and couple them to the model data in such a
way they are re-usable and become a strategic asset to Argonne that we can use
to build the beginnings of an ARM Virtual Facility (AVF). 

Since many papers develop cloud climatologies from ARSCL we can use MODAL to
investigate the impact of the local environment on clouds retrieved using the
simulator. Using a model to generate our cloud scenes allows us to "turn on and
off" the local environment. There are two specific examples we will explore:

1) The impact of surface heterogeneity at the Southern Great Plains. We will
download data from ARM's LASSO project and use this to force LES using
observations with and without the effect of land surface heterogeneity (ie the
"patchwork" of crops around the site).

2) The impact of flow over terrain on radar cloud climatologies. We will model
open oceanic clouds near ARMs Eastern North Atlantic site with and without the
island it is located on to see if the clouds measured are truly representative
of the open ocean.


.. figure:: ./twopanel.png
   :scale: 50 %
   :alt: ENA terrain 

   Figure 4: Left: Terrain of Graciosa Island in the Azores, Eastern North Atlantic. Note the small size ofthe island. Right: Aerial image of the landscape around the ARM Southern Great Plains Site. Note the patchwork of crops which lead to differing moisture fluxes which generate clouds. 


Software Engineering and Sustainable Science
--------------------------------------------
All code and results will be version controlled and hosted on a private GitHub
repository and after we have published results and the code is in a mature,
tested, state we will release open source. While the framework will not be as
sophisticated as we originally proposed it will be useful to collaborators and
able to be used as a tool by DoE for understanding how instrument parameters and
local terrain and land use impact measurements and retrievals of cloud and other
properties. 



References
==========
[1] Robert M. Rauber, Harry T. Ochs III, L. Di Girolamo, S. Göke, E. Snodgrass, Bjorn Stevens, Charles Knight, J. B. Jensen, D. H. Lenschow, R. A. Rilling, D. C. Rogers, J. L. Stith, B. A. Albrecht, P. Zuidema, A. M. Blyth, C. W. Fairall, W. A. Brewer, S. Tucker, S. G. Lasher-Trapp, O. L. Mayol-Bracero, G. Vali, B. Geerts, J. R. Anderson, B. A. Baker, R. P. Lawson, A. R. Bandy, D. C. Thornton, E. Burnet, J-L. Brenguier, L. Gomes, P. R. A. Brown, P. Chuang, W. R. Cotton, H. Gerber, B. G. Heikes, J. G. Hudson, P. Kollias, S. K. Krueger, L. Nuijens, D. W. O'Sullivan, A. P. Siebesma, and C. H. Twohy, 2007: Rain in Shallow Cumulus Over the Ocean: The RICO Campaign. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 88, 1912–1928, doi: 10.1175/BAMS-88-12-1912.

[2] http://www.arm.gov/publications/tech_reports/arm-vap-002-1.pdf?id=138

[2] Hipólito, A., Madeira, J., Carmo, R. and Gaspar, J.L. (2013) Neotectonics of 
Graciosa Island (Azores): a contribution to seismic hazard assessment of a volcanic 
area in a complex geodynamic setting.  Annals of Geophysics 56 (6), S0677.

